* [Crisis *&* Opportunity]{.smallcaps} is a compilation of largely-forgotten works by Black sociologists from the early twentieth century. These articles offer valuable insights into the evolution of sociology and its relevance to current social issues. The selected works have been previously inaccessible or ignored, and their republication serves as an effort to promote a more diverse and inclusive understanding of the discipline's history.
* Articles published here reflect the interdisciplinary nature of early sociology, with sociologists publishing an a variety of outlets and scholars not formally trained in sociology publishing work in sociology journals or in dialogue with sociologists.  
* The name [Crisis *&* Opportunity]{.smallcaps} is inspired by two prominent periodicals in the early part of the twentieth century edited by Black sociologists. W.E. B. Du Bois founded *The Crisis*, the official journal of the NAACP, in 1910 and was its editor until 1934. Charles S. Johnson, sociologist and later president of Fisk University, edited *Opportunity*, the official journal of the National Urban League, founded by George Edmund Haynes, later a sociology professor at Fisk.
* Given the prominence of W.E. B. Du Bois today, this compilation prioritizes republishing  works by other Black scholars. 
* For an overview of Black sociology during this period, see Earl Wright's *[Jim Crow Sociology: The Black and Southern Roots of American Sociology](https://ucincinnatipress.uc.edu/9781947602571/jim-crow-sociology/)* and Alford A. Young, Jr. and Donald R. Deskins, Jr.'s "[Early Traditions of African-American Sociological Thought](https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev.soc.27.1.445)."
* Artwork on the homepage is created using OpenAI's Dall-E with variations on the prompt "abstract Harlem renaissance woodcut style of Aaron Douglas" or asking it to generate images based on artwork from the era.
* Each of the works on this site is believed to be in the public domain. Feel free to copy, share, repurpose, and remix. All works published more than 95 years ago are now in the public domain, and many academic articles from the 1930s and 1940s did not have their copyright renewed. If you think we've made a mistake, let [me](mailto:neal.caren@unc.edu) know.
* [Crisis *&* Opportunity]{.smallcaps} is edited by [Neal Caren](https://nealcaren.org). Please contact let [me](mailto:neal.caren@unc.edu) if you would like to be involved.